This episode is made possible by the realistic online game war thunder,
check out this game through the link of the description below,
go through that link. Not only do you support this show,
but you get a free premium tank or boat or aircraft,
and three days of premium times of bonus, and let's get into it.
A peaceful man named town is taken over by an unnamed army.
The invaders arrive by surprise aided by the treason of an insider.
The scheming shopkeeper called coral.
The trader seeks recognition from the new masters and appointments as new mayor,
but he is despised and put to the side by both the occupiers and the town folk,
the locals under the moral leadership of mayor Orden and the town doctor
gradually wear down the morale of their enemies. At first,
they do it with passive resistance,
but this gradually evolves into sabotage and the killing of soldiers.
This is the pop premise of the moon is down a novel by celebrated American
writer. John Steinbeck, the novel was published in 19 four.
Two was an explicit tool of propaganda.
It was translated into several European languages and distributed clandestinely
across occupied Europe,
where it inspired local resistance movements against the axis.
After the walk Incan, the seventh of Norway awarded Steinbeck,
a medal for his service, the moon is down does not mention any location,
Northern nationality of the characters, but the inspiration is clear.
The German occupation of Norway and the man who inspired coral is one of the
most infamous traders of all time.
VI Christing the man who sold his country to the right
Abraham Lawrence Jansen chrisling was born on the 18th of July,
1887 in Telemark Norway, the son of Lutheran minister,
and a well known genealogy. John Lawrence chrisling in his youth,
not interested in continuing the line of eight consecutive pastors.
He decided to join a military academy instead in the 1920s with the rank of
major Christ was sent to Russia as a military attach to the Norwegian embassy
during his mission, he worked with free of Nason a well known Explorer,
diplomat recipient of the Nobel peace prize. The two documented,
the terrible famine gripping the Soviet population as a result of the civil war
and early Londonist reforms. And they also participated in the relief effort.
This experience left a deep impression on him,
a distrust and a fear of communism and the consequences of a mismanaged
socialist state.
He also collaborated with the British helping to mediate with Moscow on behalf
of their interests. And this earned him an appointment as a CBE,
a commander of the order of the British am empire upon returning to Norway
Christing has decided to leave behind the middle career for a political one.
He served with the agrarian party and was appointed defense minister,
a post that he held from 1931 to 1933 in those years,
the great depression did not span Norway as in many other countries in Europe,
the economic crisis brought about the specter of political violence,
ever more fearful of a communist takeover. In June of 1931,
Christing sent the army against a union strike his and the government's
heavy-handed tactics. They did not gain very much support.
Eventually the government it fell in 1933 Christing has ambitions
to create his own party, gain power, looking for inspiration.
He looked to Germany on the 17th of May VI Christing and state attorney Johan
Bera, formerly founded the national Sam or national union. By the way, I,
I haven't apologized yet, but I must hear my Norwegian pronunciation.
I looked them up when I can. It's pretty tough.
This was modeled after the ruling parties in Germany,
initial Italy adopting their trappings members used the Roman salute.
They formed a paramilitary guard called the herd and deck in uniforms dawned
with Eagles. Even the party Lin was a sort of swastika like symbol.
The national union's program was decidedly nationalistic,
and anti-communist it included a total ban on strikes,
the elimination of unemployment and the sterilization of undesirables.
There were three main differences from the Nazi party that had inspired them one
chrisling and the national union never adopted socialism ideology,
which was at least at the roots of the ruling parties in Berlin.
And in Rome two, Christing never made antisemitism a part of his plans.
And three, no national union tried to retain ties with Christianity.
After six months from the foundation,
the national union was put to the test running for parliamentary elections.
It was a total disaster.
The party gained only 2.2% of the vote and got zero seats doing only a little
better than their communist rivals at the following elections. In 1936,
the national union did even worse having alienated much of their C electorate,
but not everything was going wrong for crystalling while attending a conference
in the German port of Lueck, he met Alfred Rosenberg,
beating ideologists and foreign policy advisor to Hitler.
Rosenberg saw some potential in crystalling and introduced him do several
military political top brass in Berlin. And just like that,
the ties with his future masters were being established
After the start of the war in Europe, in September of 1939,
it became very clear to Nazi leadership that for a substantial war effort,
they needed more on and more ships.
This was an opportunity for Norway.
It could offer both in December of 1939,
he returned to Berlin and made a proposal to Rosenberg.
He would stage a KU guitar in Oslo,
install himself as fur of Norway and invite a German landing in support of
the plan chrisling offered to Eric Kridder commander of the creeks Marine
details on Naval agreements between the Norwegian fleet in the British Royal
Navy on the 14th and the 18th of December.
Chrisling met with the fewer himself who granted German military support for his
coup in chrisling schemes.
The German military presence would not be an occupation,
rather a garrisoning of his country to deter an allied landing,
unbeknownst to him,
the German high command intended to take over Norway much earlier than he
expected on the 3rd of April look, 1940,
Christing traveled to Copenhagen for a meeting with German secret services,
during which he handed over even more military intelligence, six days later,
Germany invaded Christing was taken by complete surprise,
but he took some initiative and decided to proceed with this coup seizing the
public radio officers.
He declared himself prime minister and asked for Norwegians do not resist the
Germans who were there to protect the country from an Anglo French invasion.
The invaders immediately recognized his collaborationist government,
but king hack on the seventh of Norway was not of the same opinion.
He declared Quizling's government to be illeg him as and fueled the resistance
against the, their marked,
even after his eventual escape and relocation to Britain.
According to world war II, law, German commander general,
Nicholas VA Farkin hosts prepared the invasion of Norway in a single afternoon
with only the help of a travel guidebook.
The invasion started on the 9th of April,
opposed by both the Norwegian and British Royal Navys.
They opposed the German landing fleets heading for Bergen and trhe succeeding in
sinking 12 German vessels, but EU Fafa air superiority.
It convinced the British Admiralty to cancel further attacks on German landings
Bergen in the means our and the Norwegian army was preparing to fight the
invaders to a demand for surrender. The Norwegians replied,
we will not submit voluntarily. The struggle is already in progress. However,
the Norwegian army,
it was all prepared units moved inland to take advantage of the rugged interior,
but the German progress, it was fast by April the 20th,
11 days into the campaign,
the German army advanced 180 miles from Oslo.
The first British troops led by major general magazine had landed at Hass off
NAIC on April the 15th. They strategic port for the shipment of Anor the force.
It was ill prepared and ill-equipped meaning magazine took its time to finally
move to NAIC in may. Meanwhile,
the Norwegians had to find a loan against Germany,
skilled mountain for troops of general title a second landing expedition at Tron
time supported by Lord of the Admiralty.
Winston Churchill had been canceled and replaced by smaller forces,
north and south of the city,
the British alongside French and Polish forces clashed with the Germans with
heavy casualties on both sides, but the expedition, it was doomed for failure.
The troops involved at little to no air or AR re support.
Plus they had no training of mountains in warfare in a cold climate.
Unlike DS units on the 28th of April, the British commander in Tron time,
general Paget, he ordered an evacuation. And this,
by the way is where our friend Adrian car Wyat made his escape.
You can check out our biographics video on him.
If you haven't seen that one yet, it's a good watcher for might say so myself,
half to Toronto time, the forces in NAIC,
they were left to hold back the Germans. But by the end of may,
the British cabinet decided for a total retreat losing the whole expedition
reforce to the Germans would've spelled disaster in terms of loss of men
equipment,
a morale king Haren of Norway embarked with its government on June the seventh,
heading for Britain by the 9th of June, the campaign,
it was over the Norwegians had suffered 1,335 losses killed or wounded,
which was 2% of their army. The Anglo,
French and Polish allies lost a total of 2,402 soldiers.
And the Germans lost 5,660.
These may appear to be a small campaign compared to others of world Wari,
but the Norwegians and their allies,
they held out for two months against a German invasion longer than any other
country, except for the Soviet union.
The campaign had major political consequences in London with the resignation of
prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, and the appointments of Winston church op.
But getting back to the story today, what were the consequences for creasing
While the fighting raged on the Germans realized that creasing,
despite his reassurances had lost control of the situation NAS,
the country was far from being pacified.
The leader of the national union was eventually sidelines and the Germans
installed a man in Oslo,
Joseph Taren appointed rash commissioner Norway on the 20th of April,
1940 Christ's plan. It was crumbling.
He had a grand idea of him as the leader of an independent Norway,
albeit under German military protection,
the appointment of Travat would've put his country under direct German control.
After the capitulation in June, the parliament, it was dissolved in August.
Norway became a part of the third, right,
but crystalling was not completely outta the picture yet.
Tar saw some use for him, at least as a local figurehead.
The commissar installed whistling as the head of a puppet collaborationist
government. And he proceeded to form a cabinet in the Autum of 1941,
but it was clear that the one pulling this strings would beat Turbon all along.
He proceeded to issue a series of proclamations,
all of which were approved and countersigned by creasing, these reforms,
they included consolidation of one party rule the revocation of freedom of
speech and the introduction of rationing in that same year creasing.
And Turbon welcomed to visit from Heinrich Hela,
who come to oversee the creation of the SS Norland division.
This was composed of Norwegian and other Scandinavian volunteers who pledged
allegiance to the R and fought under German offices shortly afterwards on the
21st, June, 1941,
the invasion of the Soviet union began and on this occasion as well,
increasing had grands plans to shine and to prove his commitment to the struggle
against bism idea was to create a Legion of volunteers to support the German war
effort against the Soviets, the Turbon. He was quicker and beat him to it.
He created a unit of volunteers similar to the SS Norlands,
but larger in scale, a skilled politician,
the Irish commissar placated whistling by reassuring him that the new Legion
would swear allegiance to him rather than any German authority.
The volunteers would also be allowed to wear Norwegian uniforms,
have their own offices, and would only see action on the finish front.
Christing had no choice, but to play along.
And he urged all Norwegians to join the Legiant counted 1,200 recruits
in total many from the herd Quizling's own parliamentary force.
Eventually turban pulled the rug under decreasing. The volunteers were issued.
S uniforms were made to swear on oath to the fur and were sent to the toughest
spots of the main Russian fronts, including the SGE of Lenning grad.
After suffering heavy losses,
the remaining soldiers displayed poor discipline and fighting spirit,
at least according to the SS high commands, but really who could blame them.
The Legion was eventually disbanded and this spells another failure for
whistling.
His idea of contributing to the direct fight against communism had first been
hijacked. And then it had ended in defeat. What's worse.
His already thin base of supporters had been depleted.
I the onslaught of the Eastern front now good news in the online game,
war thunder, you don't have to worry about your soldiers not having discipline.
They're just digital people who carry out your whims.
Like you are some sort of God, which is nice.
War thunder is today's sponsoring the best way for me to show you that game is
to play at sale. Let's jump over to the computer. Everyone.
Welcome to war a thunders. I'm just getting right into it today. We are Germans.
Uh, well actually I'm British, but we are playing Germans. This is a,
I don't even know what tank I'm on.
I had a converter one before and it just got completely destroyed.
You never wanna play convertible. I don't even know what that's for.
It moves really fast,
but this guy's also pretty NiPy this war thunderer I'm playing as TA the tank
game is kind of my favorite, but this guy plays as a plane.
You can also play as a boat. I imagine not in this scenario, there is no seat.
Tanks are a great place to begin. Also begin with arcade.
You can play arcade or realistic or simulator. I always just stick with arcade.
It's kind of fun. You just jump in. If you get,
take the game a bit more seriously though. Definitely play. Uh,
definitely explore those other game. Modes. Loads of tanks,
one day thousand 200 vehicles in this game. Uh, not just tanks. Of course. Uh,
last time I played this map, I got stuck in a hole, which wasn't brilliant.
Stop, stop, stop, stop, stop back it up. Back it up. Don't go over this. Okay,
now we're ready. Target this. Oh,
what I got them. Uh,
but then someone got me back pretty much immediately look at this.
This will fly in. I love this effects. It reminds me of that snip. Oh wow.
He really got me crew knocked out and by knocked out, they mean, you know,
they're, they're in bloody pieces, but fortunately it's just a video game.
So we can res spawn. This is war thunder. It's a great way to sport the show.
It's a lot of fun. It's free to download. So why, why not just go give it a go.
Here's the convertible tank Swar under sign up using the link below to get that
free premium tank or boat or aircraft and the premium
time. And let's get back to it.
The account we've painted so far shows it as if crease was the own only Nazi
sympathizer in Norway. At that time, the reality is actually pretty close.
Novelist and journalists are SCO a former member of the resistance. In fact,
estimates,
there only 2% of the population were supportive of creasing and the Germans,
but the Norwegian prime minister could count on the support of some
heavyweights. Most notably the novelist Kunu Hanson.
One of the giants of Norwegian literature,
Hans took won the Nobel prize for literature in 1920 in the mid thirties,
his support of the Nazi party became incredibly vocal to the point of donating
his Nobel medal to Joseph gulls. At the beginning of the invasion,
one of his articles read Norwegian, throw down your rifles and go home again.
The Germans are fighting for us all and will crush the English tyranny over us
and over all neutrals out of the remaining 98%,
who did not like greasing many were involved in the resistance against the
occupies. Sometimes this manifested in actions of civil descent,
but then escalated into acts of sabotage and assassin.
These were coordinated by the Milog or home front resistance movements with
40,000 members at its peak. In addition to the home front activities,
ordinary citizens did everything in their power, not to yield to the occupation.
It became common on public transport to stand up as to avoid sitting next to a
German or a known collaborator.
The Germans took this issue so seriously that they issued to decree prohibiting
to stand on public transport. If seats were available,
an underground newspaper describes very clearly the purpose of civil dissent
tactics. What the Germans suffer most from here in Norway is the coldness.
They feel from the people and their exclusion from contact.
Let them feel this chill to their very marrow.
The underground press was incredibly active peeking at 300 different newspapers
and magazines.
The government retorted with a 1942 degree that announced the death penalty for
perpetrators of anti-party sentiment. Even in private writings,
such as diaries as the Norwegians, tried to distance themself from the Germans,
the Germans were trying to get very close actually to Norwegian women.
One official SS document stated it is expressly desirable that the German
soldiers conceive as many children as possible with Norwegian women,
regardless of whether it is within or outside the bonds of matrimony.
This was part of the LeMans born program whose aim was to breed as many Ary
children as possible in Norway, 12,000 children were born to these unions.
Some consensual most were forced by the fear of consequences of not complying.
Sadly women involved with German officers did not have the sympathy of their
fellow citizens and could get their heads shaved or be branded with swastikas.
This hostility are continued even after the war.
Many of these 12,000 children were ostracized and often sent away.
Interesting fact,
one of them fled to Sweden to escape this fate and achieved worldwide fame with
our art. You may know her as Frida from the band Aber
Several young men and women from the home front escaped to Britain,
where they were recruited by the special operations executive or SOE.
This army of secret agents,
commando and saboteurs had been instituted by Winston Churchill with the mission
to set Europe ablaze. In other words,
harass German occupation forces throughout continental Europe.
The first operation of the Norwegian SOE commando took place on the 21st of
March, 1941,
their targets VE Laton islands home to the fish oil tanks that were needed for
the production of explosives, the operation. It was a success,
especially from a propaganda point of view,
a news Israel of the time shows the commandos sending a mocking telegram to
Hitler from the islands. I read her Hitler reference. You lost speech.
I thought you said that whenever British troops land on the continent of Europe,
German soldiers will face them. Well, where are they?
The same news reel shows the rounding up of Germans and creasing for
interrogation lings here of course meant local collaborators.
And it's telling how already at this stage of the war,
that Quizling's name had become a synonym for trader on the 1st of February,
1940 Vire was appointed as head of state.
In addition to being head of the governments,
which sounds like a rather empty ceremonial title that was simply bestowed upon
him to keep him happy.
He even had his head on a stamp that the head of state was still the king and
the reigns of government were held by Taron around 1942,
the commando raids in Norway,
they continued mutually supporting and ever active home front.
The most famous action was the destruction of the Telemark plan,
a research facility for the production of heavy water,
which was part of Germany's research effort to develop nuclear weapons.
A little known fact is that a previous raid by an all British team had failed
with six commanders being captured.
Chrisling humiliated by the successes of the SOE in the home front, and, uh,
ju by Turbon authorized their execution. These were formal POWs.
They were uniformed British soldiers. They weren't spies their execution.
It was a war crime, according to the Geneva convention in the same period,
creasing imposed,
or simply authorized measures to enforce harsh martial law on the population.
One of these measures was the forced registration of all Jews in June of 1942
in September, all Jewish property. It was confiscated on October the 25th,
1942 Jewish men over the age of 16 were sent to Auschwitz,
followed by women and children on November the 25th of the 770
people deported 740 of them were killed in the extermination camps.
Only 12 returned after the war,
Chrisling went from cruel BL to cruel blender in 1943 as head of state.
He formerly declared war on the Soviet union.
And I instituted mandatory conscription.
75,000 young Norwegians were called up to arms,
many served in the ski units in Finland's,
but the majority were sent to for the German war effort.
As part of the compulsory labor service compulsory labor was extended to women
in 1944,
when a popular chief of police Gunnar Sison refused to prosecute two girls who
had dodged this unfair draft Queensland demanded that he'd be put to death.
These efforts to ingratiate party leadership were all the more futile as it was
clear that the allies were gonna win war on the 18th of October, 1944,
Soviet troops crossed the border to Norway.
This was the first page in the last chapter of VidCon.
Crystalling sad existence, a failed ambition and treason.
The Soviets were not interested in pushing Southwood.
They instead established bridgehead where Norwegian soldiers under the
government in exile staged to landing in January of 1945,
Christing was invited to Berlin to meet with Hitler. During the meeting,
he proposed desperate plan.
He wanted Norway to regain his independence in order to form an Alliance of
Nordic and genetic people.
He also proposed to the Germans to build a fortres Norway. In other words,
used his own country to stage the last stand of the regime against the allies.
After all, at this point, Norway was home to some 400,000 German troops,
both proposals, unsurprisingly.
They were rebuffed after Hitler suicide on the 30th of April Admiral,
Carl donuts succeeded in his fur. One week later,
DS summon turbot knowing him to be a fanatic.
He dismissed the RS MAA handing over the duties to general boom.
On the 8th of May German forces in Norway capitulated the home front immediately
secured control of the country. On the same day,
Tovan blur himself up with a hand grenade on the ninth Norwegian police arrested
creasing in his Olo mansion called Gimley. According to north mythology,
this was the home of the survivors of Ragner rock. The Twilight of the gods.
The end of times,
chrisling was put on trial with other national union collaborators.
His charges included treason war crimes,
crimes against humanity and embezzlement.
The prosecuting attorney asked him if he had in his speeches expressed the
viewpoints that the Jews are guilty of.
A number of the misfortunes that have stricken the world chrisling did not
flinch. Yes, that is my absolute conviction.
His initial indifference to antisemitism had obviously changed during the warp.
All the evidence was against him. Christie's defense was that all he had done,
he had done to protect Norway from German rule,
but proof of his secret meeting in Denmark one week before the invasion. Well,
it sealed his fate as a trait fi Keasling was executed by firing square on the
24th of October, 1945.
So what is the legacy of VI chrisling? He left no children and his name.
It's now synonymous with collaborator,
with a trait who sells this country to his enemy.
His career may have started with the,
of protecting his country against the Soviet threats,
but when he made contact with the Germans,
all he wanted was recognition and power with his incompetence and his false
promises. He alienated his German allies with his fearful ruthlessness.
He alienated his own country. The irony is that even without his scheming,
Germany, would've probably invaded Norway. And anyway it's resources,
they were just too precious to their war effort.
So what would've bit of him in that case? Well,
let me go back to Steinbeck's novel.
The one I mentioned right at the beginning in its mayor,
Oden is forced by the invaders to cooperate.
They want him not the trader coral to be the front of their decree and orders to
become the legitimate face of their power. But he refuses to cooperate.
If the soldiers want to play dirty, they'd have to do it on their own.
When the resistance intensifies and the officers threaten reprisals,
the mayor refuses to put an end to it, whatever the consequences,
maybe in other circumstances,
VI Bitcoin Quizling could have been in or in our history when he chose to be a
coral. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below, and don't forget to subscribe.
We've got brand new videos just like this four times a week and hit that bell
when you hit that subscribe button, because that actually lets you know,
when we put out a new video. So that is cool. And as always,
I'll see you next time.